Object-Oriented Programming or OOPs refers to languages that use objects in programming. Object-oriented programming aims to implement real-world entities like inheritance, hiding, polymorphism, etc in programming. The main aim of OOP is to bind together the data and the functions that operate on them so that no other part of the code can access this data except that function.

OOPs Concepts:

Class
Objects
Data Abstraction 
Encapsulation
Inheritance
Polymorphism

1. Class:

A class is a user-defined data type. It consists of data members and member functions, which can be accessed and used by creating an instance of that class. It represents the set of properties or methods that are common to all objects of one type. A class is like a blueprint for an object.  

For Example: Consider the Class of Cars. There may be many cars with different names and brands but all of them will share some common properties like all of them will have 4 wheels, Speed Limit, Mileage range, etc. So here, Car is the class, and wheels, speed limits, mileage are their properties.

2. Object: 

It is a basic unit of Object-Oriented Programming and represents the real-life entities. An Object is an instance of a Class. When a class is defined, no memory is allocated but when it is instantiated (i.e. an object is created) memory is allocated. An object has an identity, state, and behavior. Each object contains data and code to manipulate the data. Objects can interact without having to know details of each other’s data or code, it is sufficient to know the type of message accepted and type of response returned by the objects. 

For example “Dog” is a real-life Object, which has some characteristics like color, Breed, Bark, Sleep, and Eats.

3. Data Abstraction: 

Data abstraction is one of the most essential and important features of object-oriented programming. Data abstraction refers to providing only essential information about the data to the outside world, hiding the background details or implementation. Consider a real-life example of a man driving a car. The man only knows that pressing the accelerators will increase the speed of the car or applying brakes will stop the car, but he does not know about how on pressing the accelerator the speed is increasing, he does not know about the inner mechanism of the car or the implementation of the accelerator, brakes, etc in the car. This is what abstraction is.

4. Encapsulation: 

Encapsulation is defined as the wrapping up of data under a single unit. It is the mechanism that binds together code and the data it manipulates. In Encapsulation, the variables or data of a class are hidden from any other class and can be accessed only through any member function of their class in which they are declared. As in encapsulation, the data in a class is hidden from other classes, so it is also known as data-hiding.

5. Inheritance: 

Inheritance is an important pillar of OOP(Object-Oriented Programming). The capability of a class to derive properties and characteristics from another class is called Inheritance. When we write a class, we inherit properties from other classes. So when we create a class, we do not need to write all the properties and functions again and again, as these can be inherited from another class that possesses it. Inheritance allows the user to reuse the code whenever possible and reduce its redundancy.